
                                      Sleep Hygiene

(How to improve your sleep! Find out what interferes with your sleep and what you can do to improve it!)

What Interferes with our sleep
-Substances - alcohol, tobacco, caffeine, drugs and medicines.
-Stress- Work, relationships, school.
-Medical & psychiatric illness- anxiety, depression, and pain.
-Scheduling - deadlines and frequently changing bedtimes.
-Sleep environment- partners or pets, watching TV or reading in bed.

--IMPROVING SLEEP--

1) Set a sleep/Wake schdedule
  This works as this helps us keep our Circadian Rhythm i in proper synchronization. The correct Hormones and neurochemicals fire when they need to and we can fall asleep and wake up with ease!

2)Exercise daily but not a night
  Our Core Body temperature starts to cool down towards the night. This helps us fall asleep. If we exercise in the evening or night, our CBT rises and can lead to difficulty in falling asleep

3)Invent a relaxing bedtime routine
  This has been proven to be very successful. 30 - 20 mins before sleep create a routine that only involves relaxing activities - reading a book, opening mail, etc. Washing your feet works very well! Try to avoid watching netflix or browsing social media. A small snack before bed has been shown to promote sleep.
  Having a routine will psychologically prepare your body for sleep, making it easier to fall asleep.
  If you experience anxiety while in bed, get a worry-diary. At least 30 mins before going to bed, write down everything that is worrying you and that you need to complete, along with a time you will complete them the next day or in the coming days.


4)Avoid caffeine, cigarettes, alcohol, and drugs!
  Caffeine inhibits one of the primary neurochemicals that makes us feel sleep. Avoid consuming it within 6 hours of bedtime.
  Cigarettes, alcohol, and drugs have been proven to reduce the quality of sleep and cause fragmented sleep.
  Although, low doses of alcohol(1 drink or less) are generally sleep promoting.

5)Use the bed only for sleep
  This is a technique called conditioning. If you only sleep in your bed, your mind automatically associates the bed with sleep.
  Watching Tv or studying in your bed do the opposite! So when you finally lie down to sleep, your mind starts thinking about the show you are currently following or the homework you have due. This can invoke anxiety and make it harder to fall asleep.
